Freebsd 14 Wayland and Wayfire using Nvidia on Dell XPS 15
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5vHdJ5-drMs

[0:00] - [0:30]:
hi in today's video I'm going to be covering installing freebs D14 running whand
using the wfire compositor with WL roots on a Dell XPS 15 2019 model with an
Nvidia graphics card that's right FreeBSD 14 with whand running on an Nvidia
graphics card let me switch across the browser here and this is some photos of
the machine I'm using this is

[0:30] - [1:01]:
Del XPS 15 2019 model with a GTX 1650 Nvidia graphics card what I'm going to do
is tell you how to get this set up uh explain what works on the hardware side
and on the software side and take you through lots of T um tips and tricks um
that will be useful to you so first of all on the FreeBSD Forum um first thing I
came across about wfire which is the WL Roots compositor that

[1:01] - [1:33]:
I'm using for Wayland was this message found zero gpus cannot create backend
failed to open any DRM device so I saw this before I actually decided to try and
get this working and thought okay that doesn't look good but maybe it's possible
and it is and I'm going to show you how so what I'm going to do is uh come
across to some notes that I've been going through so what I'm going to do is
just come across to YouTube here and show the previous video I did about this

[1:33] - [2:01]:
uhsd 14 Wayland okay what you'll see here is a video I did about 10 days ago
fbsd wh and desktop with wfire and this was running on my old 2011 MacBook a 11
in uh with 4 gig of RAM okay so what I'm going to do is actually expand upon
this video

[2:01] - [2:30]:
and uh show you the steps that uh you need to go through to get this working
with Nvidia on a delx ps15 and also some new tips and tricks um that will be
useful to you so what I'm going to do is actually come across to my notes for
that video and show you the actual difference so the difference there's only um
a couple of bits of difference in the setup for the Delux PS 15 compared to

[2:30] - [3:00]:
the MacBook Air so on the MacBook Air what we were doing is installing some
drivers that we needed basically we had to install Li um VA Intel driver Li VA
utils DRM 515 kod and that required us to put in our Etc rc.com um kld Dore list
equals i915 KMS

[3:00] - [3:30]:
okay so that was the setup um on the MacBook Air and that was all working so I
was figuring okay maybe um there's something that we can actually do to get this
working so had a look at Robo noie on YouTube and he's got a a video about um
getting Nvidia set up I think it was done about last year and from that video I
got a couple of tips and those were the packages that we needed to install

[3:30] - [4:03]:
and some things we needed to add to our kld list uh which is kind of like the
sort of modules that get loaded basically so here's the secret Source this is
what you need to do to get this working so the packages that we're going to be
installing are the nvidia-driver Nvidia Das settings nvidia-drm d515 kod Liv va-
Intel driver and lib va-

[4:03] - [4:30]:
utils uh now this particular machine has got sort of um uh Intel and Nvidia
graphics cards basically uh let me just have some M te so this is the next bit
of the secret source and I'm going to give you a tip about um the SRC command as
well so the csrc command can be used to edit your

[4:30] - [5:01]:
Etc rc. Com or you can add it manually but what we need to do is add these
particular modules to be loaded okay so what we do is pseudo Sy ysrc kld Dore
list plus equals and what this plus equals does is it will append these items to
the K delete um kld list in your rc. comp instead of overwriting the content so
we do plus

[5:01] - [5:30]:
equals I 915 KMS Nvidia D mode set nvidia-drm Linux and Linux 64 or what you can
do is manually edit the ETC rc. comp file and then basically add this section in
so that's the only difference really uh between getting this set up on the
Nvidia graphics card

[5:30] - [6:00]:
in my dxps compared to my old 2011 MacBook Air so what I'm going to do is
actually go through and show you some other tips and tricks on getting this set
up and show you what actually works and what doesn't so first of all what
doesn't work on the hardware everything works there's only two things um that
don't work and one has a fix so if config you'll notice that

[6:00] - [6:30]:
there is no WiFi card showing up however if I do PKG search WiFi what you'll see
down here is this thing here Wi-Fi box do- iwl WiFi and this is a w Wireless car
driver via virtualized Linux wi-fi box I believe is a virtualized Linux
environment that allows you to use

[6:30] - [7:00]:
um wireless cards that are supported on Linux on free BSD I haven't actually got
into that um but it looks like it is possible um using Wi-Fi box to get the
built-in Wi-Fi drivers working on the delx ps15 however I have got a old Alpha
wireless card um an external USB card that I know works on pbsd because I've
tested it on my Mac book air so

[7:00] - [7:31]:
that's not an issue so that's the only um thing that wasn't supported out of the
box is the Wi-Fi but it looks like you can actually get it working with Wi-Fi
box the next thing is um mbank in cuder with the Nvidia graphics card that
doesn't seem to be supported so for instance when I'm using OBS I don't have the
option to record using inven um encoding that's the only other thing so

[7:31] - [8:01]:
the wireless we can fix the enven encoding it doesn't look like we can
everything else works so um the HDMI uh works perfectly so I've got my external
monitor set up the keyboard backlight works the screen backlight Works um the
headphone jack um all the keyboard I manag to switch the keys which I'll show
you because on a Delux ps15 the control key um is on the far left and the ALT

[8:01] - [8:30]:
key is by the space bar we want to swap those over so I'll show you how to do
that what I'm going to do now is actually come through and show you a nice new
bit of kit that you can use and that is tofi and that is a whand roofi dmenu
clone so I'm going to launch that now and this is tofi you can see it looks
exactly like a dmenu up here

[8:30] - [9:00]:
and what I have um it set up to do is just show desktop entries and you can see
here these are all the desktop applications that I've got installed I've got
chromium which I showed you in a previous video so if I just open chromium here
this is chromium with wide Vine support to enable DRM video and audio playback I
showed you how to do this in the previous video this is built using a poudrier
Jael

[9:00] - [9:31]:
and this has got uh wide Vine support so I do Chrome flags and scroll down to
the bottom down here what you'll see is CDM storage database and CDM storage
database migration that means wide Vine is enabled so that you can work watch
things like Netflix um Channel 4 ITV in the UK um uh the Youtube movies um in
the US which use DRM encryption Spotify all that kind of of stuff so we got

[9:31] - [10:00]:
chromium set up there um we've got the ality terminal we've got volume which is
the pulse um audio volume control because uh Firefox and OBS use pulse audio we
got Firefox we've got OBS studio um we've got displays which is a [Music] um
displays so this is the um thing that lets you configure your displays

[10:00] - [10:30]:
basically and this is going to be important because um you can see here we've
got two screen names dp-3 and Ed p-1 and that's going to be important for MPV
because I'm going to show you how to use MPV to automatically play videos on
your second display because there a trick you need to know for that so you can
see here these are all the desktop applications say chromium ality pul audio
we've got emac that's

[10:30] - [11:02]:
the emac client Firefox displays um OBS config this is the config GUI for the
wfire compositor we got the Nvidia settings um program and then we've got VLC
which is actually automatically installed with OBS on FreeBSD now what I'm going
to do is while I've got this open I'm going to show you how to configure this
because there's some tips and tricks you need to know to get this to work
properly um and I'm also going to show you how to

[11:02] - [11:33]:
shorten all these names are displayed here because by default in your
application launcher things like Firefox will be called Firefox web browser um
OBS would be called OBS studio um config would actually be called the wfire
config manager and then VLC would be called the VLC media player I'm going to do
is show you to toffey so first of all what you need to do PKG

[11:33] - [12:00]:
search toffee it's like Ry but with a tea okay toffee tiny Dynamic menu for
Wayland I also saw this mentioned on Brody Robinson's Channel um with a few tips
on getting the best performance out of this by explicitly setting the font path
to the font you're going to use but there was one thing um that had me stomp
here with the background color

[12:00] - [12:30]:
for the menu so what I'm going to do is actually come into the coffee config
toffee okay so this is toffee so the configuration file is do config toffey
config and basically this has got um two modes you can either run in the dmenu
mode that I showed you or in a typical Ry mode where it comes up with a big

[12:30] - [13:03]:
um overlay on top of your application showing you a list now the important thing
about this application launcher which is vital is that it works even when
applications are full screen so you can see here this application is full screen
but toffey still comes up at the top of the screen so that's really important um
the thing I'm going to do is actually show you how you can while

[13:03] - [13:32]:
my brain's still working how you set up WF fire so that it doesn't start up with
a panel I'll explain why you don't want a panel um okay so back to toffee so
these are the important settings anchor top so this sets toffee um to be run at
the top here now there are several different um ways you can run toffee you can
run if you just run toffee um it

[13:32] - [14:03]:
will start up like typical um sort of dmenu kind of Clone where it just shows
all the binaries on your application but you don't on your system but you don't
want that you want tofy Das drun and what that does is that just shows the
applications that got desktop launchers so anchor top so that sets this to be at
the top we got the background color hex color here sort of an off black um

[14:03] - [14:31]:
border width what we need to do is set the Border width to be zero D1 launch
equals true and then what we need to do is actually set the font path so by
default what happens is it uses Pango um which does a font look up and that
delays the startup because it's got to look up the font uh before it renders it
so what you do to impr improve the St up time is you actually specify the full

[14:31] - [15:02]:
path to a font um in this case I'm using Fe code bold uh which gives us this um
nice thing here I would recommend the code bold because um we're not going to be
using hinting for the fonts and if you don't use a bold font it can look a bit
uh pixelated okay we set the font size the height we set um here the hint font
equals false okay um so we don't hint the f um the

[15:02] - [15:31]:
fonts because that improves the rendering time as well horizontal true mint
input width what this does is this controls the input size so as you can see
here if you set like a by default it'll have a input in a input width and you
can see as I start typing here the text comes up

[15:31] - [16:00]:
um so for example if you had a input width of 100 what would that would do is
that would make a gap of 100 pixels here um and then it would list all the
applications so you'd have a big gap um and the text wouldn't be buted up to the
left of the screen so we don't want that so we set the Min input width equal
zero and what that does is that kind of removes the left padding on

[16:00] - [16:31]:
there um it's not the you can see I've got padding left here here all this kind
of stuff um you need minute input width equal zero to remove all the padding to
the left and that's going to not that's not going to um interfere with you
actually typing out the name of the application um so let me just escape this um
number of results so this is the number of results that actually show up by
default uh in the menu and you want to set that

[16:31] - [17:01]:
to something like 10 um the more results you have um that it's going to render
by default the longer it will take to launch so outline width now this is
another one that's really um important the Ry menu that um tofu tofy can do you
know um how it comes up what it does it by default it has a big border around
the

[17:01] - [17:31]:
menu right and when I was setting this up and the in the Border color with
something like magenta uh so what happened was every time I was launching this
um instead of me being able to see all this text and everything it just coming
coming up of a big magenta bar and I couldn't figure what that the hell it was
until I realized um the outline width is related to the border which pull in the
Border color so we set the outline width to

[17:31] - [18:00]:
zero we set all these padding options padding bottom left right to zero and
padding top um eight okay because otherwise the text would be sort of right up
at the top of the screen so they want a little bit of padding um there so eight
this the set up font size 10 height 30 and padding top eight get it sort of
centered properly like that then we've got the prompt color we got the prompt
text so you can see here this

[18:00] - [18:31]:
is a little um prompt you know like you get a shell uh prompt color and the
input color result spacing we've got the selection color so this is um when
something is selected yeah uh the text color and the width so the width is 100%
so that goes the full width of the screen so that's toffee so the config for
tofy now what I'm going to do is

[18:31] - [19:00]:
move on and show you how to reduce the names that are displayed in the toffee
menu so if we come into local share applications what you'll see is I've
actually copied all the default um applications that I use uh into this D
directory and modified them and I'm going to show you

[19:00] - [19:33]:
how to do that so by default the desktop application launchers on freeb FreeBSD
are installed in user local share applications so you can see all here here are
all the desktop entries for the applications what I'm going to do is show you
how we copy these um from this location to local share applications and modify
them so what we do is we we do a

[19:33] - [20:01]:
CP user local share applications like chromium uh to local local share
applications okay we do this copy the applications we want to modify from that
directory into our local share applications okay so what we're going to be doing
is actually modifying these in some different ways there are some

[20:01] - [20:31]:
applications where I want to reduce the the the name that it shows up in the
launcher and there are some applications I want to hide from the launcher as
well I'm going to show you how to do that so first thing simp simply here uh I
think this might be called chromium web browser by default let's have a look uh
list user local share applic ation chromium web

[20:31] - [21:01]:
browser uh no I know why I copied that one okay important one this is important
this is vital if you're running wfire and in this case um uh what we need to do
is change this exact line you can see here exact by default it's just going to
be Chrome percent capital u what we need to do is add in this Das Dash O Zone
Das platform equals whand

[21:01] - [21:30]:
okay so that's what you need to do um for chromium so that's why we copied that
across and I've run out of T um otherwise chromium won't launch okay so that's
first tip for chromium um OBS studio um by default this is called um you know
OBS studio so all you need to do is edit the name here and just change it to OBS
okay and that will um basically make it come

[21:30] - [22:03]:
up as OBS um emac so what we have is emac and the emac uh client and each and
they both create desktop entries um I'm always going to be running the emac
client so what I want to do is hide emac from showing up as an entry in the
toffey launcher and this is done by adding this line at the bottom here hang on
hidden equals true so copy the emex uh

[22:03] - [22:32]:
desktop file from user local share applications desktop um emac do desktop to
tier. loal share applications modify and stick hidden equals true at the bottom
and then for emac client what I did was the name for that by default is emac uh
in sort of parentheses um client so I just changed that to emac okay

[22:32] - [23:02]:
um uh Firefox again Firefox is going to be called Firefox web browser so what we
do is we just change the name to Firefox um MPV um I'm always going to be
running MPV on the command line so I don't want it to show up as a desktop entry
so we just put hidden equals true to prevent MPV showing up as a desktop
application in the launcher um Nvidia settings uh I think this is

[23:02] - [23:32]:
called Nvidia settings config or settings manager or something um let's have a
look let's user local share applications Nvidia yeah Nvidia X server settings is
what it's called by default so we can just shorten that to Nvidia yeah rather
than having um you know big lot of text come up so the the idea is we want to
remove all the extra text um that shows

[23:32] - [24:01]:
up here basically that we don't need okay pavu control um that is called let's
see yeah see by default that's called pulse audio volume control we'll just
shorten it to volume okay qt5 CT desktop that's a application for setting the
theme for

[24:01] - [24:32]:
qt5 um applications like um OBS studio so that you can set the dark mode but I
don't actually once I've done it I can I can always run it on the command line
so I just set it to be hidden so I'm not going to use it again once I've set it
up um uh VLC you know that's like called VLC media player so we just shorten
that to VLC uh wfire config manager um I changed that from wfire

[24:32] - [25:00]:
config manager to just config because otherwise when you're typing Firefox um
you're going to have to choose between the wfire config manager and Firefox uh
which would be annoying so when I type fire fire I just want Firefox to come up
not the way fire config config manager so we just change that to config and
WeChat um is a command line application for some reason it installs a desktop
entry tree so we just set that to be um hidden equals

[25:00] - [25:30]:
true once you've done all of that you've got the toffee set up um that that's
what you'll end up with basically a nice little application launcher there
that's really easy to use so let's go on to um some other stuff um so what I'm
going to do is actually go through um some settings that are important so while
my brain is still on that topic um of screens and stuff from

[25:30] - [26:01]:
earlier I'll show you um MPV okay config MPV MPV doc config okay couple of
things here um what we can actually do is specify the audio device like this so
this is how you can actually specify um the default audio device that MPV uses
so audio- device equals

[26:01] - [26:30]:
ossd dsp1 that's my headphones we can check what devices we've got with cat Dev
snd stat and you'll see here um PCM uh one is the uh PC Z is the default that's
the speakers pcm1 is the headphones uh PCM 2 is HDMI and pcm3 is

[26:30] - [27:00]:
my USB mic okay so that's how we set the audio device now um I'll also show also
while I'm actually thinking of this um on on the audio side what I need to do is
uh show you something else um sorry to get switched back and forth but just
while I'm thinking cuz this is important there is a um I showed you in this
video here how you can set up virtual

[27:00] - [27:33]:
osss um audio for OBS Studio that you can actually record snd IOD audio which is
used by things like chromium Firefox uses pulse audio by default and so does OBS
studio so you can capture the audio from Firefox but not from chromium so in
this setup guide what I was basically doing is showing you how to get up um
virtual OSS um set up but

[27:33] - [28:03]:
what you need to do [Music] um is actually um I should have put that in I didn't
so hang on let me just switch to my root okay right virtual OSS enable equals no
so

[28:03] - [28:30]:
virtual OSS um what it does you can use it to create a loop back device so that
you can basically record the audio from chromium and stuff but if you enable it
at boot what happens is it interferes with your DSP devices so you can set a
default DSP device like your headphones but if you have virtual OSS enabled um
in rc. comp what it's going to do is

[28:30] - [29:02]:
it's going to clone the default uh the first audio device which would be your
speakers um so you could set your default audio device to be headphones but if
you've got virtual OSS enabled it will override that and send it back to the
speakers which is really irritating and you have to faf about with virtual OSS
um and a control thing to actually switch to another um audio device which

[29:02] - [29:35]:
would mean every time you boot up you'd have to run a command to set the V the
audio device back to what you want what we do is in our rt.com we set virtual
OSS enable equals no and then what we can do is when we actually want to use it
to record uh snd IOD audio from things like chromium with OBS we would run
pseudo CIS RC onear virtual OSS um and um let me just put

[29:35] - [30:01]:
that in my docs so I remember to push it um let me just put this in while I
remember and I'll amend the notes as I go along um but this is just important
because otherwise it's going to interfere with your audio setup so in

[30:01] - [30:31]:
this bit here what I was basically saying is um you set up virtual OSS you set
it to enable no and then you can basically do sudo service on stock virtual OSS
um and then as root what you can do is create the loop back device um and
replace the device name you want to capture here so this would capture the um
speakers if I wanted to C to the audio from the headphones I'll do that

[30:31] - [31:00]:
um and then you can record um in OBS but that's just a little tip um if you've
set up virtual OSS and you're wondering why your default um audio device is not
working okay so while I'm on the audio device thing uh which is related to MPV
as I just s showed you here the default audio device what you have is um is it
bootload is it sometimes I forget no

[31:00] - [31:32]:
it's in your CIS c.com okay this is where you can set the default audio output
so to set the default audio output in your CIS c.com fuse hw. sn. deault unit
equals 1 one will be the headphone zero would be the speakers and what you can
also do is use all new your devices automatically by adding this code here

[31:32] - [32:01]:
so hw. snd do default uncore Auto equals 1 and what that means is suppose you
you boot up without anything plugged in um any headphones or anything plugged in
then you plug your headphones in it should automatically switch to your
headphones and then when you unplug the headphones it will switch back to the
speakers but this only applies to things that uh a new device

[32:01] - [32:31]:
seems to be something that's not connected when you boot up so if you boot up
with your headphones so if you set the default audio unit to zero your speakers
and this to one and you boot up of your headphones plugged in it's not going to
switch to the headphones because it's kind of not a new device as it were it was
already plugged in when you boot it up so the new the using new devices seems to

[32:31] - [33:00]:
be after you've actually booted up um and then it will be a new device if that
makes sense uh also here this is something you need for chromium as well and
this is a tip from Robo noie to um improve the responsiveness and change the
responsiveness from the server to the desktop so that's just a bit on the audio
side of things that I wanted to cover um how virtual OSS can interfere with your
default audio device and how

[33:00] - [33:32]:
you can use new audio devices automatically there are things you can supposedly
answer to your boot loader. comp uh or or boot device. hints to specify speakers
and headphones but I don't think that's actually needed and it's a bit of a
fuffle to do so anyway after that little Sidetrack I want to get back to MPV uh
because the next important thing is full screen okay so here we go full screen

[33:32] - [34:01]:
full screen on second display so on gnome um there is a different option you
need to use for getting the full screen to work um let me see if I've got that
here so I can just show you the difference I just want to show you the
difference

[34:01] - [34:31]:
between the two okay so on gnome uh running Wayland what you can do is um in
your MPV Doom you can run you can have FS fs- screen equals 1 and that will um
set the video to be automatically displayed full screen on your second display
because it's a zerob based index uh screen zero would be your

[34:31] - [35:02]:
laptop screen one would be the uh external display however these options don't
work on wfire on WL loots and this is something that kind of really critical to
me every time I open a video I want it to be open full screen on the second
display I don't want to have to constantly move a video across to the second
display every time I open it so after a bit of fapping about I figured out what
the option is these are two two

[35:02] - [35:30]:
options you need here fs and fs- Screen Dame equals where do we get the equals
from the display application so as you can see here in um this application here
W displays we got dp3 that's the um external Monitor and Ed dp-1 so this is how
we figure out the screen

[35:30] - [36:02]:
name okay so we want dp-3 we put that in our MPV doc config and it will work and
basically automatically open videos on the second display full screen so that's
something really important to actually get set up um and I just wanted to cover
that um so what I'm going to do is actually go

[36:02] - [36:30]:
through um my DOT files and just see if anything rings a bell that I need to
actually point out um so one thing really important input uh input okay so as I
said uh D xps15 the keyboard

[36:30] - [37:01]:
layout what you have is um on the on the left side of the keyboard you got
Control Function the sort of Super Key then alt then space so what we need to do
is actually swap control and ALT that's vital um so what we need to do is we
come into our wfire so wfi is the um conf the compositor that we're basically

[37:01] - [37:33]:
using and there is a GUI application that you can use to configure this and what
it does is it will automatically save the config file in do config wfire um you
can create a config wfire directory in put wfire in in there but then the GUI
application doesn't pick that file up so my advice is to keep the config file
for wfire in in

[37:33] - [38:02]:
config.ini uh so that you can use the GUI application uh to actually configure
it and the reason why you want to use the GUI application is because it will
allow you to um create commands to do things um like launch Firefox or you know
um run toi the application launcher up here and you put in the command and you
can then it will give you an option to say

[38:02] - [38:33]:
okay what keys do you want to use to launch this command um and you need to use
that because some of the key names are hard to figure out otherwise but anyway
this is the setup you need for the Dell XPS 15 keyboard layout um in your
wifi. inii so under the input section what we have here is X kbor layout equal
GB xkb uncore model equal

[38:33] - [39:00]:
pc105 this is the critical bit here xkb options equals control colon swap
underscore l altore l control so what that basically does is that swaps left alt
and left control so that the uh instead of control being at the far left um an
ALT being next to the space bar

[39:00] - [39:33]:
alt will become control next to the space bar and control on the far left of the
space bar become alt so you'll then have a layout of um alt the function key the
super key and then control um because otherwise it's going to be a real stretch
to do copy and paste so this is um something that's completely vital and then
what we have here is um uh Ed um xkb rules equals EV Dev and we

[39:33] - [40:00]:
what we do here is I know this isn't a Mac but we set the xkb variant to Mac and
the reason for that is so that the um shift um and the key on the second level
yeah will will will add a till okay because we're always going to be typing till
uh as a shortcut for our home directory and otherwise youve kind of got to do a
stretch to shift and then the key

[40:00] - [40:30]:
underneath the Escape so that's why we set the xkb variant to Mac so that the
till um is right next to the shift key so that's vital next thing is um how do
we um set up wave fire without a panel and you're going to say I need a panel no
you don't cuz explain why

[40:30] - [41:00]:
uh two reasons why you don't want to panel uh because we've got the application
launcher up here yeah so all you're going to be having in the panel is the time
real realistically you can have um like an applet for the volume so uh but you
can see here volume so that's the pulse audio volume here but we can launch that
as a GUI application so there's no need to actually it it's it's faster to
launch

[41:00] - [41:30]:
something the volume by using tofy rather than coming up here clicking a little
drop down and then selecting stuff and faing about okay um so realistically all
you'd be having because you um on FreeBSD there is like a network manager for
ghost BSD but is a bit clunky and you know not great so you're going to be using
the command line to change um networks and stuff like that

[41:30] - [42:00]:
so all you'd be having up here is a clock so you need a panel just for the clock
because I say I've got a clock down here in emac I got a clock in t-x here so
and and I'm I'm always going to have applications full screen um so that was
another annoyance every time with a panel um it was really annoying because
every time I open an application on a window

[42:00] - [42:30]:
and a new workspace I was having to put it full screen so that um you know
because otherwise for example I'll show you emac this is full screen if I take
this down here you can see it's got a title bar if I had a panel as well that
would push the content down to like here so you'd be losing um at a guess sort
of 80 to 100 pixels ju just to have a clock up here um and why do you need that
if you've

[42:30] - [43:03]:
got it in there so the other reason is it actually makes wfire a lot faster to
actually start um it actually starts up a lot faster without the panel um and
also when it opens Windows because it doesn't have to figure out okay there's a
panel there so I need to resize it so that you know all that kind of stuff so it
actually makes uh wfire start up faster and the actual Windows render

[43:03] - [43:30]:
quicker without the panel there so what I'm going to do is actually show you how
to uh set up um WF um okay this is the section here I don't need this I need I
need to comment that bit out okay so this is the bit here auto start so in your
wave fire.in

[43:30] - [44:02]:
file what you have is auto start and what we do is auto start WF shell equals
false WF shell is the thing that controls both the panel and the desktop picture
the lovely um icon here so what we do is auto start WF shell equals false and
then we have background equals w WF background so config WF

[44:02] - [44:30]:
shell um and what you'll see here is the background up at the top here this is
the background and this is the path to the FreeBSD Lynch mob. JPEG that is set
as my um desktop background and um if you go to veren site uh if you search for
verm moden fbsd wallpapers he actually got a link to a lot of our wallpapers for
free BSD uh where you can actually download

[44:30] - [45:00]:
this wallpaper so that's how you can um set up wave fire and WF shell not to use
a panel there's two parts um in your wfire inii you have auto start the auto
start WF shell equals false and then background equals WF background and that's
a tip from um the a gith Hub issue that was actually um recommended

[45:00] - [45:31]:
by the developer of wfi so that's all good um and then in your W WF shell. inii
um file you actually have the backround and you can actually set that um open
the config here so uh in the config so this is the wfire config manager and this
is where you start stop up and this is like the command so um this is the toffee

[45:31] - [46:00]:
drun thing here so what you can see is um what you do is to create the keyboard
shortcut for toffee um in the wfire config manager we open command click plus
and then we fill it out like this type regular command tofe Das dun and then
what you do is you press here this will be empty then you press the keyboard
shortcut that you want to to use and you

[46:00] - [46:30]:
can see why I'm suggesting that you use the GUI applications because otherwise
it's extremely difficult to work out sometimes what the actual key you pressed
is here because you can see here it's super Capital key a um and there's no way
you would figure that out without using the um GUI config manager here you'd be
stumped if you were trying to do this manually so you do want to use the wfi

[46:30] - [47:02]:
config manager and remember it will store the config file in config wfire ini
and it won't pick up a wfire file in config wfire wfire okay so this is how you
um create the keyboard shortcuts okay and you can see here these are things what
I also want to mention is Hardware related touchpad gestures yeah touchpad

[47:02] - [47:32]:
gestures perfectly working perfectly touchpad work out absolutely brilliantly um
so in the desktop side here what we've got is extra touchscreen gestures
viewport switcher uh follow Focus output switcher Expo idle view Port swipe so
that's for swiping and what you need to get the touchpad working while my brain
is still on that um uh get 3 BSD 3

[47:32] - [48:00]:
BSD uh XPS rout XPS uh is it loader yeah that's the one this is what you need
this is what you need for um touchpad they used to be a separate thing which
I've been um I can't remember off hand there used to be a separate thing for
touchpads that you would use but this is the new module and

[48:00] - [48:33]:
this works both on my MacBook Air 2011 um and on the Dell xps15 so what you need
is wsp load equals yes in boot loader. and that is how you set up the touchpad
uh is anything else why um H yeah I want to cover mixer Tui as well while I've
got that um set up

[48:33] - [49:00]:
um which I'll show you so that's the touchpads gestures so you can get the the
touchpad working with wfire so you can swipe left and right okay wsp load equals
yes in your boot loader. comp and then in your wfire um thing what you want is
extra touchscreen gestures um viewport swipe some of these options here
basically

[49:00] - [49:33]:
um okay and you can see here this is how you can figure the panel um so you can
put in um stuff like here um there thing well put in the uh okay yeah menu uh no
that's not it what you set the background in here um but I'm I'm not using this
um I'm I'm specifying config and you can copy my config okay we got other things
like here like move resize window walls

[49:33] - [50:03]:
um yeah there's a way to I think there's a way to actually um move Windows
across to this to the other display but I need to get into I haven't fixed that
so mix a Tui okay so you're thinking okay why do I need another mixer I've got
pavu control here why do I need two mixers what two

[50:03] - [50:31]:
audio systems unfortunately or fortunately depending on your Viewpoint um so
what we got is um the default audio is OSS which is was it snd IOD audio however
Firefox and some other applications like OBS Studio use pulse audio I believe
you can actually set Firefox to use snd audio in the back end

[50:31] - [51:00]:
uh you can do about config and change the output for Firefox from pulse audio to
snd audio um but what what the um issue is um if I come across to my sort of
notes Here let me um my audio notes hang on me

[51:00] - [51:30]:
just okay [Music] um yeah audio okay so um setting the um if I just run mixer
hang on mixer um what you'll see is the sort of audio levels for Stuff basically
um and you can see we've got

[51:30] - [52:02]:
various things we've got Vol we've got PCM we've got speaker record iio gain
monitor um and what you have to do is to set the volume level of each of these
um options you kind have to do Vol mixer vol. volume equal 1 100 then set the
PCM mixer PCM volume equal 100 100 and it's a paint and then record and monitor
um this is how you mute and

[52:02] - [52:32]:
unmute so mixer vol.1 mute equals one that mutes it and zero unmutes it um but
the issue is setting all these um options on the command line is a bit of a pain
so what we want to do is actually install mixer Tui PKG search mixer Tui audio
mixer with a terminal user interface so mixer Tui and what you'll see here is
this looks like the Ula

[52:32] - [53:00]:
mixer that you may be familiar with on Linux uh works the same way you can
easily come through um select the audio devices and um easily increase the
volume so I would really recommend this because um escape to quit um otherwise
it's a real pain to set the volume levels for stuff and it's very easy to
overlook setting the volume level for

[53:00] - [53:30]:
your mic before you start recording an OBS studio so you need to set the volume
level using the mixer Tui and for your recording devices and all that kind of
stuff um but there's a couple of things you need to do to actually um get this
set up so when you install mixer Tui you'll get two messages come out in the
console message from CIS CTL info mod to use

[53:30] - [54:01]:
this interface make sure you have loaded the cisl info kernel module by doing
sud KD load CIS CTL info um um to add it permanently what you need to do is add
um cctl info load equals yes to your bootloader doc config now you can do this
two ways you can do it by manually editing the file or you can be Co and use the
CIS RC command which

[54:01] - [54:30]:
actually is it primary use is to edit the um rc. comp file in etc etc rc. comp
but with the- f option you can specify any file um and this makes it um is is a
safer way of doing things because um uh you're not kind of editing the file
going to make a mistake of course you can still make make a spelling mistake
here but what you do is you run sud sudo cisr

[54:30] - [55:00]:
c-f booot loader. cctl infocore load equals yes or you can manually edit the
boot loader. config you know pseudo booot loader. and then add cisl info uncore
load equals yes to load comp like this then what you need to do um is the next
section uh the message you'll

[55:00] - [55:33]:
get is uh you need to use um cctl by name so what we do is pseudo KD load cctl
by name uncore improved and we need to add that to our bootloader do comp as
well so we do p sudo cisr c-foot loader. com cctl by name improved equals yes or
by manly editing your uh bootloader Doom um P sudoi bootloader Doc and then

[55:33] - [56:00]:
adding cctl by name improved equals yes once you've done that you will have um
mixer um Tui setup and another thing um that just reminds me um um okay where is
it up here OBS Studio okay so we're actually use to record the screen with

[56:00] - [56:30]:
OBS studio um another thing that you need to install is W robs um because what
you if you you don't you won't be able to record the screen basically um WL robs
will give you an extra option in the sources section in OBS um which will say uh
let me brck it up you it'll give you two options whand

[56:30] - [57:02]:
output DMF a buff or Wayland output scy and what you want is the DMF a buff and
you can then uh select a screen to record just the same way as you would um
normally but you need WL robs installed for OBS studio and um this is really
important because basically I got everything set out ready do the demo um opened
OBS studio for the first time oh

[57:02] - [57:30]:
 I can't I've got no option to record the screen um then I remembered okay I
 need to install something else um and once You' install WL robs you will get
 the option in sources um to um select a screen using dmfa uh buff and you want
 to use dmfa buff and instead of SCP y because it's um apparently better um I
 think sepy copies a lot of stuff into memory or something

[57:30] - [58:03]:
um but that's just something while my brain was uh think about it and also with
OBS studio if you've been going through the guide and watch the previous video
um which I'd recommend um what you need to do for OBS studio is um create the uh
VI um under uh login.com and need um memory locked unlimited like this so this
is how now we set the character set language um and then once you've done that
you do capore MK DB till the for

[58:03] - [58:31]:
sl. login and it should be login I keep forgetting to change this um my bad comp
um and that creates a sort of database um but you need that for OBS studio um so
what I'm going to do is just go through some stuff and refresh my memory of all
the things have gone through to um set up so um what I'll do is I'll go

[58:31] - [59:03]:
through the vot config files and I'll go through the um dot files just to see if
there anything sort of um you know rings a bell about what I got set up so I've
gone through a lot of this before uh in the previous guide um so we've got
things like um asni load and these will be default we we want ZFS uh we need
null fs and temp FS for purrier um which

[59:03] - [59:31]:
is the build environment uh is the package Builder that lets us build the wide
Vine port for chromium so we can watch DRM encrypted audio and video uh we set
the audio here um uh HDI load U audio load um temperature stuff the touchpad um
I mentioned there wsp load equals yes uh

[59:31] - [60:02]:
this is a tip from rogo Robo nugie um asynchronous IO so we want that um and
then we want uh Q's load um for virtual OSS but again we don't load virtual OSS
because as I said if you load virtual osss it will override thep device um so
you can set as I said if you set the thep device um Qs um Q um virtual OSS will
override it and set it back to the speakers basically um and

[60:02] - [60:31]:
these were the things that are needed for mixer Tui uh CTL info load equals yes
and CTL by name improve load equals yes so that's the loader let's go for the
acceptor uh we got the devs um FS tab so this is needed for Linux here so
[Music] so Linux so this is needed

[60:31] - [61:03]:
um for actually I think the Nvidia card actually loads Linux as you can see in
the KD list we actually to load Linux and Linux 64 um uh so these things are
required for the Nvidia card and um also prri a as well one of them I think was
required purrier um but I may be wrong um we've got our PF config so we got PF
here um

[61:03] - [61:33]:
this is my USB to ethernet adapter um got like I don't need that one I can
remove that and then this is um for my railink USB card uh rc.com so rc.com
let's go through that just bring that down one level uh ZFS enabled clear temp
poost name um if config um on the sort of default

[61:33] - [62:01]:
um device sh enable no um PF yes time and date and we got powered here so we got
um powered enabled powered Flags um performance and economy and that brings me
on to what's the fans like on this computer quiet as anything it's like a Prius
yeah there's not a noise even when

[62:01] - [62:32]:
playing YouTube videos or um DRM encrypted video using chromium um using MPV
recording with OBS studio now not a whisper nothing the fans don't go crazy at
all um so there's absolutely no noise at all and the performance is great okay
now this is the important thing here the kld list that I mentioned so kld list
equals Nvidia mode set Nvidia DRM oh

[62:32] - [63:00]:
I've got that in twice my bad I don't know why I got that in twice okay um I was
adding something and uh so these are the things you need Nvidia mode set Nvidia
DRM Linux Linux 64 I 915 KMS you also want ext2fs and what that does is that
allows you to mount Linux drives like EXT 2 3 and four

[63:00] - [63:32]:
um I'm not sure if it's got right access I think it might do um okay so then
we've got seat enabled um seat D enabled equals yes that's needed for um Wayland
we got debus enabled um and just while I think of it bit being w wfire start so
this is how you start wfire you can you um if you just start

[63:32] - [64:00]:
wayf fire in the terminal we're not using a um a login manager so basically we
just log in on the command line you know username password and then we start
wfire and the way you want to start wfire is like this uh you want to create a
script so I just call it wfire start or whatever um exe db- launch D- exit with
with session wfire and that will start wfire with debuff and you want that for
things like desktop

[64:00] - [64:30]:
notifications um so I have desktop notifications that come in from things like
um YouTube and what will happen is they will sharpen emac because I use um emac
the ednc emac desktop notification server so notifications will come up um in
emx notify send three BSD is awesome

[64:30] - [65:00]:
bang oops and you can see there notify send 3bd is awesome so that's how you get
um desktop notifications working um just something um am on this one or this one
yeah TheBus uh Linux enabl yes we want that um for various things um I think we
need it for um the mvidia primarily uh also

[65:00] - [65:31]:
here virtual OSS enabled equals no um so again we don't start virtual OSS by
default because otherwise it's going to override the DSP and so what you do is
when you want to use it you run sudo CIS rc1 virtual OSS uh snd IOD enable
equals yes that's the audio um used by chromium we we enable that so that we can
um chromium will play without that but we need to enable that so that we can
capture the audio

[65:31] - [66:02]:
with OBS uh we got um devfs system rule set so that we can mount um drives as
our regular user and these are the settings for my Ray link Alpha WiFi so w
Lands Run Z wl0 if config WLAN WPA um sin DHCP so uh you then create you know
you

[66:02] - [66:30]:
create the um wa WPA supplicant thing with your um you know the SSD and password
and stuff and um if you have that set up and you boot up it will just
automatically connect to the Wi-Fi so um that's the let me just um see if I can
find it Alpha May link adapter yeah like this you get for like

[66:30] - [67:02]:
10 quid okay also works with Kelly NX um so this is what I got one of these um
it looks a bit like this um says gasy uh I think I can't remember which one it
is I'll have to dig out the thing but it's basically an alpha Ray Link Card and
they work fine on um fre BSD is it or is it this one it might be this

[67:02] - [67:31]:
one yeah it looks a bit more like this yeah basically it says Alpha on it but
basically it looks like that and you can pick them up for you can see dirt cheap
um and they work perfectly so I have to dig that out um so that was the uh WiFi
uh cctl okay just go for the cctl disable the system Bell uh VFS us Mount equals
one that's

[67:31] - [68:00]:
so that we can mount uh drives as our user um this is where we set the default
audio unit so s SW snd default unit equals 1 that's going to be the headphones
use um new um audio devices automatically um this is still required for chromium
I believe k. ic. shm mcore allore removed equals 1 and this is a chip tip from
Robo noie who change your

[68:00] - [68:32]:
responsiveness from server to desktop using k. shed. preemptor fresh equals 224
so that's assist CTL um user local Etc I've got my doas um and this is sort of
Puri a setup so um basically I've got doc files or both both the MacBook Air and
the uh Delux ps15 um root files for both the um

[68:32] - [69:01]:
MacBook Air and the XPS um okay hang on so uh the pp do files um so what I'm
going to do is go through zsh EMV couple of things you need to set up which I
covered in the previous video but these are the things you need to set like your
home uh this is important the xdg runtime directory

[69:01] - [69:31]:
which are covered in the guide um amongst this lot um you're getting set stuff
set up Wayland here yeah this is how you create the xdg runtime directory um
change the section here with you know to your username basically you go through
and you got you got to get this set up because otherwise whan's not going to
work um so in your shell config you have to have xdg runtime directory um
pointed to

[69:31] - [70:03]:
VAR run user and then the ID which is going to be 1,1 um by default uh M enabled
um whand uh qtp uh QT qpa Platform Theme so that will allow you to set the dark
mode for QT applications uh shush uh wlc um and MPD I'll also cover uh MPD uh
zsh is

[70:03] - [70:31]:
sort of um nothing I need to cover in in that um here's the login comp so your
loginor comp should look like this basically uh memory unlocked equals unlimited
I think I need to actually uh I think I've got login missing a couple of options
from

[70:31] - [71:03]:
that one no um I think I had it set somewhere else I was also setting the text
uh the you know um that other stuff you can set the C and you know um okay um so
config um the other thing yet um you want to set up is the gpg agent um I cover
this in the guide as well you want to set uh you want to create in [Music] um

[71:03] - [71:34]:
ing Nu PG in your home directory you want to create gpg-agent Doom uh we set in
the pinak program used by gpg and you want to set it to user local bin piny
curses because the graphical versions of the pin prompts don't allow you to
paste in your password so you want to use the terminal version pentry curses CU
otherwise you get really pissed off okay um so I'm

[71:34] - [72:02]:
going to go through the dot files um the config uh so is a laity um nothing you
need to go through any of these um gtk3 uh settings this is how you enable dark
mode um so uh in in the settings.ini in the gtk3 do0 file um directory in do
config

[72:02] - [72:31]:
you want um something like this um I think some application some application I
installed automatically installed ader um as a default theme so basically what
you do is gtk D ion D theme name equals aditer Dark gtk theme name equals Ed wa
to dark and then gtk application preferred Dark theme equals true once you've
done that all your gtk applications will have a dark theme and I also showed you
in that guide how you

[72:31] - [73:00]:
can set QT applications to have a dark theme as well okay MPD um yeah uh so we
got MPD set up here um and basically this is so that you can run MPD as your
regular user um so it will have access to the music in your home directory
because otherwise by default it will store everything in something like Varon
MPD uh which is all

[73:00] - [73:31]:
owned by the audio user or something um which makes it a real pain um so this is
how you run MPD as your regular user um got MPV as I showed you MPV the
important things in there we can set the audio device so we can yeah so DSP zero
will be speakers one you know headphones two Etc um and the other important
thing that we needed

[73:31] - [74:00]:
to set is this down here FS full screen and fs- screen- name equals and you get
the screen name from the display program which I believe is called canini or
something uh but I've listed that in the guide um the application you need to
install once you got that set up an MPV um the videos will automatically um be
opened up on your second display and these are basically

[74:00] - [74:31]:
um profiles so what you can do is you can actually have profiles that apply to
particular URLs so I covered this in a previous video but you can create a
profile that only applies to YouTube here so you can see here it's kind of
matching a regular expression and you can um override particular settings just
for that um URL basically so that's MPV um and got M NCP

[74:31] - [75:02]:
TX um so again toffee last thing um anchor top border width dun launch equals
true and again I'll show you the [Music] um config w f was it w f um if it's in
this one or the other I'm going to forget coffee yeah okay

[75:02] - [75:30]:
command Okay so this the tofe config and this is the um wii. um you can see here
um this is how um I launched um sort of toffee basically um and you can see how
I did it in the gy and this is the config um and we launch it with tofy Das dun
which gives you um only applications

[75:30] - [76:02]:
that have a desktop entry okay because there's no point having a load of
binaries coming up there that's just pointless in my opinion um and again we set
the font so I'd recommend um F code bold is a nice font and um um PKG search F
code yeah so just uh PSE sudo PKG install Fe code and then in toffee what you do
is font equals user local share fonts F

[76:02] - [76:30]:
code F code-- ttf and that will give you um nice stuff like that I recommend
using the B the Bold font because otherwise uh because we're um setting the font
hinting to false um if it's not bold it will look really crap basically um
horizontal to yeah we want it be horizontal as a dmenu clone remember the Min
input width is the thing that

[76:30] - [77:01]:
controls space right here so if you had 300 you'd have 300 pixel space and then
all the things listed I don't want that big space I just want them coming up
here like that um outline WID padding you know promp color you can copy all of
all that stuff there so I think that's most of um everything I wanted to go
through um I've gone through the root dot files the um dot

[77:01] - [77:32]:
files uh the config for wfire um so let's just have a quick recap of the
important things so most important thing is the drivers so recap on this the
drivers that we need to install are nvidia-driver Nvidia Das settings now let me
just do do a search here PKG so cuz this took a this is one thing that had me
stumped okay so what you'll

[77:32] - [78:02]:
see is you got a couple of options you've got Nvidia drmk mod um and what I
think that did was that installed Nvidia DRM 5110 K mod okay so this kind of
like a meta package I believe um so when I tried with the 510 um uh km mod
drivers that didn't work that didn't work on my um MacBook Air either I had to
use the 515 on the um the

[78:02] - [78:30]:
MacBook Air so first of all what happened was I installed the Nvidia drmk mod
and that didn't work what happens if I install the other one so I uninstalled
that and then installed Nvidia DRM 515k mod um as shown here and I tried it and
it didn't work and I thought okay what happens if I then install the lib VA
Intel driver and the lib VA

[78:30] - [79:02]:
utils um and at that point what I had was Nvidia mod set Nvidia DRM Linux and
Linux 64 installed and it still wasn't working and I thought okay um what was
happening basically was first of all um first stage I got to was no gpus found
then I got something um saying waiting for DRM back end oh well that's a bit of
an improvement uh then what after actually installing these things

[79:02] - [79:30]:
after switching to Nvidia DRM 515k mod installing the LI VA Intel driver and
livv utils cuz this machine used Intel as well and then what happened was you
know it was so I put in I also added in the i915 KMS typed wave fire and me the
terminal and the desktop came up and it all worked so it took a

[79:30] - [80:04]:
bit of uh detective work to actually get this working and figure out the correct
packages and all that kind of stuff um but these two here Linux and Linux 64
these were a tip from Robo and nugie site um and also saw people mentioning you
need Nvidia mode settings but so this is the setup this is the secret source to
get this working the Nvidia driver Nvidia settings so that's the settings thing
Nvidia DRM 515k mode that's critical Livia Intel driver livier utils

[80:04] - [80:32]:
and this is the kld list in our rc.com I 915 KMS Nvidia mod set Nvidia DRM Linux
and Linux 64 so those are the things you need to get set up um to actually get
this to work okay um so that's what basically going to um sort of look like in
the rc. com um and again there is uh no en and

[80:32] - [81:00]:
no Cuda um by the looks of things um so that's that's the the one and only
downside um of this is um you don't have en enven encoding for OBS Studio but
that was really the only thing that I ever used it for um so I can live with
about it's not too bad um you know nothing to Grumble about so that was the
drivers

[81:00] - [81:31]:
that you need to get set up um the other thing that I almost forgot was you need
um WL robs for OBS studio um yeah and this is what the login comp should look
like um we set the I'll amend my thing there um setting the character set
language um in LC um yeah uh the other new thing was um we set up mix of Tui um
and the other thing was

[81:31] - [82:02]:
getting MPV to automatically open the video on the second display um so this is
um my setup guide um for pbsd 14 with whand using the w fire compositor which is
based on WL Roots um and the other thing I me should mention is for ages I was
using gnome with whand

[82:02] - [82:32]:
uh either running a buntu nixos or Fedora on this machine uh purely because that
was the only thing that would actually run it on Linux so um you know people
always say oh no you can't run um WL rout stuff uh with Nvidia graphics cards
it's you know it's not working it's not supported um and again you know when I
was searching um for wfire and um Nvidia on fre BSD this was the first thing I

[82:32] - [83:01]:
actually got mentioned found zero gpus cannot create back end fail to open any
DRM device so you know it wasn't off to a good start before I even tried to
install this but to be honest I was just so fed up with Fedora and gnome um and
I just got everything set up on the MacBook Air and I just really had to get it
set up on um this machine as well uh the the issues with um gnome are basically
that

[83:01] - [83:30]:
uh I think I saw a comment recently someone said yeah I installed gnome and
suddenly I've got iOS on my desktop yeah is like that um and basically it's it's
like a closed environment there are no application launches or anything that
works with it is all done through extensions um and it's style over function uh
really is um so you know I've got a really nice

[83:30] - [84:00]:
application launcher like this um the other nice thing I wanted to mention about
um uh I I will mention theor in a second is wave fire um is is is actually
really really good it's better than gnome in my opinion because what it's got um
which is vital is it's got independent workspace per monitor so if I switch
workspaces on this display here it's not going to change the workspace on the

[84:00] - [84:30]:
second display okay which is really annoying suppose you're watching a video on
the second display and you switch workspaces you don't want it to suddenly
switch the video to another workspace you know every time you switch one on the
laptop that would drive you nuts so there's independent workspaces put a monitor
on wfi that's something else I wanted to mention um downsides for for Dora um a
couple of things one it's completely different to a Buon so a lot

[84:30] - [85:01]:
of the commands that you'll learned using a bunto don't work on um fedoras for
example when you regenerate your init Ram FSS you got to use something like
called Draw cut on fbsd um also you have to manually add repositories for the
audio and video for you know codec and stuff um the other really annoying thing
is you have um some things are updated

[85:01] - [85:32]:
the terminal and some things are updated in the software Center um so you know
you'll you do an update in the terminal but then you've also got to check the
software thing because it will give you some updates there and also um when you
upgrade Fedora say I upgraded fedora from 38 to 39 um it's got a big button in
the software Center update you just click that okay great that's nice and easy
but um you have to switch back to

[85:32] - [86:02]:
the terminal you got to do something like um group updates to update um um that
all the video and audio groups that you installed using these repositories and
stuff which is ridiculous so you got some stuff that's updated in the terminal
some stuff that's updated in the software Center um so you got to use both um
also um dnf is unbelievably slow the package manager

[86:02] - [86:30]:
um if I just come across here you know it's a PKG search uh Nvidia bang just
spits everything out instantly right with dnf on Fedora what happens is you've
got all these additional repositories that you'd had to enable for the audio and
video so when you search for something it has to go through and it reloads each
one of those so before it gives you the results

[86:30] - [87:02]:
you'll be sat there for like 30 seconds a minute waiting for it to update all
the repositories before it can actually give you a list of software that you can
install um so that was something that was really really irritating about for
Dora um as well as the fact that literally every other couple of days you got
updates for pipe pip pip wire or um a new kernel every couple of days so problem
with door is you boot it up you've got a load of updates like new kernel new
audio system

[87:02] - [87:32]:
so you got to install them and then reboot before you can actually get on with
any bloody work um so that so that was something that was really annoying um so
what's what's the benefits of actually using 3bsc let's have a look what we got
set up here uh we got vot ZFS so we've got [Music] um ZFS on rout with
encryption on Fedora it uses um butter fs and Lux and butter

[87:32] - [88:00]:
FS by default doesn't have encryption so what you have to do is have a lux
encrypted container with butter FS inside um and you can only use Lux one not
Lux two um the other thing is you can uh with butter FS you can have a thing
where you've got butter FS snapshots for like boot environments but you kind of
got to go through all this setup install something and change your grab file and

[88:00] - [88:31]:
everything on FreeBSD what we have is BDM boot environments um so basically what
you can do is when there's an update to the system you you can actually install
them in a separate boot environment and if something goes wrong you can just
boot into the previous one so that's brilliant the other thing that you've got
to um get your head round is packages are separate from the system so when Linux
you'll be used to like you

[88:31] - [89:03]:
know updating your packages and it updates the system at the same time on
FreeBSD it doesn't they're separated so you have um a release and all the
packages are for that release so like you know 14 you have all the packages for
14 you've got release 14.1 and all the packages will then be upgraded to work
with that release um so you don't have dependency hell um and you you either
update your

[89:03] - [89:32]:
packages um um you know PKG updates that's just going to update the actual
packages it's not doing the system you're still on release 14 and then when
release 14.1 comes out basically what you do if I've got BDM okay you basically
set up BDM um you create a new boot environment you install the updates um and
you boot into that uh so

[89:32] - [90:01]:
that's sort of another sort of Advantage is the user land and the system are
completely separate and when you're updating your packages you're not updating
the system as it were also all the config files are kept separate if you look on
um uh user bin so this is like user bin here um you know all you've got user s

[90:01] - [90:30]:
spin these are all the um system sort of utilities basically those are the
system commands have a look if you're on Linux have a look in your bin directory
you see just is full of everything everything just gets dumped in with the
system configuration as well so on Linux basically um everything go goes in one
pot um on free BSD everything is separated all the user um installed

[90:30] - [91:01]:
applications are completely separate there'll be um you know user so user local
bin okay um as you can see YT DLP [Music] um xdg you can see um w WF background
WF doc so that's another really important thing to get your head round is all
the applications are installed separately

[91:01] - [91:33]:
from the system so it's much much cleaner you're not have a look on your bin
directory on Linux and you'll see you've got all your system stuff coupled in
with things like YT DLP um that's another kind of really important thing no
system D no system D hooray um starting services and stopping on FreeBSD is so
much simpler uh you know service start service stop that's it um let's have a
look in top here uh

[91:33] - [92:01]:
you can see top um is is kind of running in one screen you can see OBS um it's
only actually saying 11% um in the OBS there but um that's another thing is you
have a lot less stuff running um on 3 BSD and it's so much easier to actually
figure out what's running and what's uh what you actually set up and installed

[92:01] - [92:30]:
um compared to uh Linux um sometimes you know you just want to stop something
and then you figure out it's I know it's using system D which calls some other
package off something it's like going to make a cup of tea and finding out you
got to turn the toaster on to get the kettle to work um drives you not trying to
um to figure out what's going on it's just so much easier on FreeBSD so another
thing some things work better on

[92:30] - [93:01]:
FreeBSD emac so much better on FreeBSD on on um FreeBSD you install the emac
devel package and that will install the latest version of emac so I'm running
emac 30 pure GGK wh and support tree sitter all that kind of stuff on Fedora or
a bun to I had to build it from Source um all the and a lot of the time on Linux
um for years had problems with packages um you

[93:01] - [93:31]:
know not loading so you know you do an update um for your packages uh from elper
and stuff and um you go to use something like it's kind of not loaded properly
or um you know it's not compiled properly that kind of thing um rock solid solid
on FreeBSD and um I don't have to build everything from Source I mean if I show
you um if I got

[93:31] - [94:03]:
it um I think it might be Fedora Fedora emx build Fedora so these are all the
steps I had to go through on Fedora to build um emac had to clone emac um like
you got to do all this weird stuff from Fedora like group install development
tools um and also I don't like the concept of the firewall where you got all
these different zones then you kind of got to build all these dependencies uh
install all this stuff

[94:03] - [94:33]:
um you know configure it with all these options make it um go through all that
plava where on FreeBSD all I have to do is um PKG install emac and that will
install the latest version of emac uh so how do other things compare other
applications compare um to Linux so this is ality

[94:33] - [95:00]:
ality works exactly the same as Linux no better no worse absolutely fine no
problems with it at all um I said emac much much better on pbsd much more solid
you can install the latest versions no issues with things glitching out or
anything like that uh Firefox works perfectly um uh YouTube video playback
everything's absolutely perfect no

[95:00] - [95:33]:
problems at all um chromium chromium absolutely fine um works perfectly well um
again I've got chromium set up with uh DRM wide Vine DRM so I can watch uh
encrypted content so that's 3bs uh FreeBSD 40 running Wayland using wfire WL
Roots compositor on a Del xps15 with an Nvidia graphics card so

[95:33] - [96:00]:
yeah it does work um and again the only um only niggles um the Wi-Fi um again
PKG search Wii um it looks like to use the built-in Wi-Fi you got to use this
thing called Wi-Fi box and the device is the iwl

[96:00] - [96:31]:
Wi-Fi um that is the card that is used by this machine I haven't looked into
Wi-Fi box but basically it's like a virtualized Linux environment to run the
Wi-Fi cards um that are supported on Linux on FreeBSD and might be something
interesting to look into um so you got lot of different cards down here so I've
got a external uh R link Alpha USB Wi-Fi card that I know works so I've tested
it on my other

[96:31] - [97:04]:
machine so that's not really a problem the only other issue as said um is nank
and Cuda um don't seem to be supported so those the only two things um that sort
of kind of niggles but um uh I never Ed Wi-Fi and I said I got a card anyway so
that's not an issue um the only thing I ever used enen en coding for was in OBS
studio um so I'm not going to really miss that too much that's not too much of a
biggie um so

[97:04] - [97:33]:
yeah absolutely great performance there's absolutely zero issues at all um
Hardware or software side so um no fan noise at all I mean you haven't heard the
fans kick in once while I've been doing this video um you know uh played videos
full screen in Firefox chromium MPV not a whisper nothing um doesn't make a
sound

[97:33] - [98:03]:
keyboard backlight Works screen backlight Works um all the ports work I haven't
tested the SD card um I can change the keyboard layout um absolutely zero
glitches with whand there's no artifacts there's no um funny issues R drawing
the screen or any bits of green or any of that kind of stuff um so there's
absolutely zero issues um with

[98:03] - [98:30]:
the hardware um and zero issues with the software or any of the um config
options that have actually um gone through and used um absolutely um rock solid
um uh great performance um it's really Snappy um let's see if I can actually uh
record uh a bit of a video

[98:30] - [99:01]:
so um let's just open up my one here I don't know if I've actually got this set
up to record the um actually saying I don't know if I got this set up to um
record the desktop audio um on this machine I have to go through and do some
sort of uh couple more tests but it does work um I just don't think I've
actually um got it set up as yet um on my to-do list but I just wanted to go
through and um show that this actually

[99:01] - [99:32]:
does work uh zero issue so this is the first video here bbsd whand desktop with
wave fire and that was on the MacBook Air 2011 with 4 gig of RAM so we got his
3B sd14 whand running on a um 2011 machine with 4 gig of RAM and a Dell XPS 15
2019 um we have 16 gig ram um so we got

[99:32] - [100:01]:
both old and new computers running fre BSD uh with zero issues and people always
say fbsd only works on 20-year-old think pads uh well I got to tell you that's
fake news um it does work on newer um machines uh again this is uh there's been
a lot of work going into the Nvidia DRM module which you can actually see on the
3bd forums and I just wanted to confirm it's

[100:01] - [100:30]:
the um DRM the one that actually works is the Nvidia DRM 515k mod that's what
you want to install um absolutely zero issues with this at all um I haven't
tried um you know hibernation closing the lid um that's usually done with the um
sort of S3 sort of power setting um and there's a I think ver Mod's got a tip on

[100:30] - [101:01]:
his site about how you can uh sort of look into that um I'm not sure um it may
be possible to kind of like log out a wfire to the console and then put the
screen down I suppose that could be a workaround um that wouldn't be too bad um
but yeah everything everything works all the um audio video um desktop
applications um no problems with anything so far touch would and um I'll

[101:01] - [101:30]:
leave that here for now so hope that helps you get uh FreeBSD 14 running on your
Delux PS with an Nvidia graphics card uh cuz it is possible and it works better
for me um than Fedora 39 basically um much more stable there's there's no
shitloads of upgrades of kernels and everything every couple of days um no sort
of obscure sort of

[101:30] - [102:00]:
commands that you're not used to running for D instead of sort of auntu and
things like that um so yeah I got two BSD on all my machines now pf5 wall um on
a my router um with My BT um internet uh MacBook Air 2011 11 in 4 gig of RAM uh
same setup and now the Delux

[102:00] - [102:33]:
PS5 um I'm pretty sure it's a um 2019 specs uh see if I can find something with
the actual specs um yeah I haven't tested the webcam cuz I never use it um I'm
pretty sure it's got a [Music] um yeah it's got really nice display this um I'm
just wondering it's got

[102:33] - [103:03]:
anything about the actual effects in here of course not uh I think it's a GTX
1650 graphics card um let me just see if I can find it I is it so difficult to
bloody find something from like Dell with the bloody specs um but anyway just to
prove this isn't a um you know some elaborate hoax

[103:03] - [103:32]:
um it's actually Linux and I'm just you know faked it you name- a bbsd 14
release there you go poofs in the pudding that's 3 BSD so what I got here is 3
BSD I've got GFS list so I' got all my um as I showed you in the previous guide
got home directory as a zfss ZFS data set and all

[103:32] - [104:02]:
my um uh all the directories in my home are also ZF and ZFS data sets as well
I've got Puri air set up for building stuff I've got boot environments um so
yeah and basically I've got ZFS encrypted rout um Wayland wave fire Z zsh emac
you know all the command line applications I want um MPD audio um OBS

[104:02] - [104:31]:
got boot environments got um Unbound DNS server um you know got ports I can
mount Linux drives uh so I can mount all my Linux drives uh using the EXT2 FS
kernel module uh I got chromium wide Vine enabled got virtual OSS um audio for
capturing audio from applications like uh chromium so yeah all good um took a
bit of a while

[104:31] - [105:02]:
to figure out the secret source to get it working and the correct combination of
packages and options that sort of thing but um you know a bit of persistence and
uh it's possible um so um I'll have to respond to this sort of post um but no
gpus found and uh put a link um to this guide on the FreeBSD Forum um so you can
follow along but I'll put links to all this under the video and um

[105:02] - [105:22]:
again this is the first video that you want to have a look at um because I go
through a lot of the steps um that I didn't mention here um getting prri a set
up that sort of thing to get chromium working um so I'll put link to all this
under the video and hope that helps